So let us recap a little bit
about JavaScript and the DOM.
First of all, can anybody tell
me what DOM stands for, yeah?
>> Document object model.
>> Document object model, huzzah, exactly.
So, the document object model is sort of,
as we just discovered before,
the way that JavaScript can
kind of conceive of what is
happening in the HTML document
that's being browsed.
Is that a, can we passively,
can a page be browsed?
I don't know, but yes.
The connection between JavaScript and
HTML is what we're thinking about here.
So, we probably are familiar
with the global
document, little case d, document.
If you haven't run into it, this is
essentially a reference that JavaScript
in the client gets to the HTML
document that is in the current page.
So that little reference document,
which we're gonna talk a little bit
more about later, gives us all kinds of
handy-dandy tools and tricks and things.
For example,
we can call its method getElementById with
a particular ID to retrieve that
element and then do things with it.
We can also use query selectors the same
as you would in CSS file, to select for
all of the documents, while ideally
there is only one with the same ID.
But perhaps all of the span documents in
your entire page or something like that.
And we can access the overall,
the kind of HTML [LAUGH] document
element with the document
element property.
There's all kinds of
other stuff in document,
so, maybe now is a good time to open up.
You can just open up whatever the home
screen is on your favorite web browser of
choice, I use Firefox.
So our consoles might look a little bit
different if you use something else,
but essentially if you inspect a page,
you will see some HTML and whatnot.
And if you go to console, hopefully you
won't get extensions complaining at you,
but you will have a fun little
interface to play with HTML.
So for example,
I can access this document HTML document.
Sorry, you will get a fun
interface to play with JavaScript,
document is the fun interface
to play with [LAUGH] HTML.
Okay, so this is where you can be
trying out as we go through and
as I show some code
examples on the slides.
Try them out, poke around,
look for other things.
Again, we're leaving a little bit
the world of everything is prescribed and
confined in the classroom and
starting to move out to just poke around.
So, I don't know what's on this
document element, let's see.
We can expand it in my little
console here and we can see, whoa,
there's all kinds of stuff on here.
So feel free to poke around as we go,
if there's something interesting and
you wanna look into it, go for it.
We will have moments to all kind
of come back together, okay.
So documents got a lot going on, getting
HTML elements is just one thing we can do,
we can also mess with them cuz that's
what we like to do as programmers.
It's mess with things
out from under people so
that they have really
frustrating web experiences.
No, [LAUGH] just kidding [LAUGH] we
will talk a little bit later about
how to avoid messing too much.
But we do wanna mess
with things sometimes.
So for example, attributes
are something that HTML elements have.
We can get them,
we can set them from JavaScript.
So essentially, we can write
HTML from within JavaScript, and
again, we're reviewing.
One thing to note about attributes,
has anybody run afoul of this before?
Sometimes if you think that
you have set an attribute that
usually sort of is a true or
false type thing by calling, let's,
Let's say we have a button element
that has the disabled attribute on it.
If I want to enable that button,
I might be tempted to right
button.SetAttribute disabled to false.
Is that gonna work?
No, because if I call Has an attribute
disabled again, it's still gonna be true,
so what is going on here?
The difference between an element having
an attribute disabled,
and its value being falsy,
or something that would
be falsy in JavaScript.
HTML doesn't really have the same
falsiness truthiness paradigm as
JavaScript.
So some attributes only
have to exist in order
to be interpreted by the browser
as doing what they do, so
be mindful of that as we go, yeah,
>> Is
that because false is
evaluated as a string?
>> Exactly, and so
sometimes you'll also see set attribute,
you'll see things like,
I don't know, set attribute,
Disabled to empty string.
There's no button here,
but you get the idea.
This would essentially disable
the element, even though it's
setting it to empty string,
because that means the attribute exists.
It has a value, HTML doesn't care what
the value of the disabled attribute is,
it just cares that the attribute exists.
The browser cares that
the [LAUGH] attribute exists.
So, that's something you'll see sometimes,
it's like why are they setting this to a
value if we're trying for it not to exist?
Because the web has grown bit
by bit over the decades, and
not everything's super
consistent all the time.
So just be mindful that you might, if you
have a weird bug related to that sort of
thing where you're, why is that
attribute still being picked up?
Just make sure that you have
deleted the attribute with
the delete attribute method,
instead of just setting it
to what JavaScript would think
of as a particular value,
but the browser and
the HTML parser doesn't care.
So fun facts [LAUGH].
All right, now, event handlers,
are something we've probably
also encountered in JavaScript.
And this also gets at what we're gonna
be talking about a lot in this course.
The contextualization of JavaScript within
the web browser, where a lot of other
stuff that's not exactly JavaScript or
not, at all JavaScript is going on.
And one of the things that's going on is
events are being fired here and there.
So there are events like clicks when
the user clicks on something, or
there are load events when a page or
what have you has finished loading.
Or there are all kinds of other
different events that we can then.
Okay, so these events we can handle in
JavaScript to do things based on user
interaction, which is what we want to be
doing most of the time as web developers.
We wanna be building useful
experiences for people, right?
Which means that people need to be
able to interact with websites,
and that is why JavaScript
exists in the first place,
because it allows us to add some more
flexible interactivity to pages.
So we're gonna be writing
a lot of event handlers, and
the general syntax of we pass in
the name of the event we wanna handle.
And then the handler function,
we're gonna talk a lot
more about that later,
what we want to happen when that
event occurs on the given element.